# DnDRandom
This program helps the user create a DnD character with as much or as little input as they desire.

INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this document is to outline the functionality and usage of a Dungeons and Dragons character randomizer that was developed in Python. This character randomizer is intended to allow as much flexibility and input as the user would like, between full randomization and fully chosen. By implementing it in this way, the user can take an idea and expand on it or start from scratch with something fully new to them. This was created to avoid creative blocks, so newer players do not have to be overwhelmed by all of the options available when creating their first few characters, and more experienced players have the option to randomize specific things that they do not want to choose themselves.

BACKGROUND
Dungeons and Dragons is a role-playing game where a group of people select avatars to represent them in an imaginary fantasy setting. These avatars can be described in a number of ways, and each different descriptor affects how they can be played in the game. Some examples of these descriptors are races, classes, and ability score distributions. For example, a character could be an Orc (race), a fighter (class), and have strong ability scores in strength and constitution, while they have weak ability scores in intelligence and wisdom. These ability scores do not have to be organized to favor strength and constitution, but the common practice when playing a fighter class is to assign the scores in that way. These features all change the options that a player will have, both in combat and role-playing scenarios. Therefore, this randomizer involves those three statistics most heavily. The character’s class and race are usually up to choice in the real world, while the ability scores are most commonly determined by rolling dice and summing them up. There are also other traits that have less of an impact on the character’s options while playing but can still be important to fully flesh out the character. These are the character’s background, alignment, and lifestyle. These pieces of information determine if the character has any particular proficiencies (athletics, pickpocketing, deception, perception, etc. from their individual history), how they usually act in scenarios (lawful good will do the right thing, chaotic neutral will follow their own interests, etc.), and how much money they will have prior to the beginning of their adventure (a wealthy lifestyle will bestow a character with more wealth, whereas a squalid lifestyle provides less wealth). These choices are useful to describe the character and help bring the character to life, but since they are not essential to playing the game, they are optional when using the randomizer.

THE PROGRAM ITSELF
How It Runs
When the program is run, it asks the user if they want to (1) fully randomize, (2) randomize with class/stat bias, or (3) partially randomize.

Fully Randomize
If the user selects option 1, they will be prompted to input a name for their character. They then have the chance to add additional info to their character (background, alignment, and lifestyle) if they want, which can also be randomized by entering “Yes” and then “random” when asked about each piece of information. Following this, the program prints to the console a drafted character sheet with all of the character’s information: their race, their class, their stat distributions, the bonuses they get from their given race, and the extra background info (if they chose to add it). This choice is intended to create fully new ideas, and sometimes work against standards. One example of this would be a bard with low charisma who could be roleplayed as someone who is passionate about performing their instrument, but altogether not very good at it. Since the ability scores are assigned in a fully random way, there is no guarantee that this will create a “normal” (based off of common practice) character.

Randomize with Class/Stat Bias
If the user selects option 2, the generation will take the same form as it would with option one, with all the differences happening behind the scenes. The user will be prompted to enter a name and given the choice to add additional info, and following this, it will print out a drafted character sheet with all of the character’s notable attributes. However, this user choice enables the highest randomized ability score numbers to go into the more important abilities. The difference here is that the ability scores are distributed in a way that is more consistent with the character’s class. For example, a fighter would most commonly rely on their dexterity and strength, or a wizard, their intelligence and wisdom. In the example of the fighter, if the ability scores are randomized and they are given ability scores of [10, 11, 14, 18, 9, 13], the 18 would be assigned to dexterity, and the 14 would be assigned to strength, while the rest are left to be randomly assigned. This method is most useful for creating a fully random, but still quite “normal” and usable character.

Partially Randomize
This user choice runs the program through a separate process from the other two. Following this selection, the user will be prompted if they want to enter specific information they want for their character for all of the following traits, in this order: name, race, class, and eventually ability scores and extra info (background, alignment, and lifestyle). For each of these traits, the program accepts “random”, and will provide the character with a randomly chosen option that is available for that trait (ex. if the user inputs “random” for race, they may be given a high elf, or a deep gnome). For any of these traits, if the user inputs an invalid option (a race that does not exist in the base game, a stat total that would not be achievable normally, etc.), the program prints “Not a valid ____” (ex. for class if they entered Class of 2022, the program would print “Not a valid class”, as that class does not exist in the game Dungeons and Dragons). When the program reaches the ability score section, there is the option to randomize the whole set or choose each one individually at the user’s discretion (the program will print “Choose some ability scores or fully randomize?”; random is chosen by inputting “random” and choosing individual scores is chosen by inputting “choose” at this point). If the user selects to choose each score, they can still input “random” on any score that they want randomized. Once again for the extra info, there is the option to skip this step, or add it to the character and randomize individual sections at the user’s leisure. Once the user has made their choice(s) for the extra info they are presented with a draft of their character sheet. This option is best used for more veteran players who have a basic understanding of what they want their character to be like, but still want some freedom as far as randomizing specific aspects.

How It Works
The base program is built with a long list of helper functions, so the main driver is not massive. 
The program itself heavily relies on these functions and changing any one of them would have ramifications in several places within the main driver. The program also uses objects, as it creates an object of the class “Player” that holds all of the relevant information regarding the created character. Every time this program is run it will create a new Player object to hold all the relevant information that is chosen or randomly generated across the duration of the program.
 
Given Events in the Code
•	The code will create a new character of the Player class that it uses to store all of the information for that run.
•	The code will always ask the user to input their desired name for their character.
•	If the user inputs an incorrect input (such as a class that does not exist or an answer that is not Yes or No in some form to a Y/N question), the program will print that the input is incorrect, and the user will get another opportunity to input something valid.
•	At the end of the run, the character sheet will always be printed with all the available information for the newly created character.
•	The user will always be asked if they would like to add extra information (background, alignment, and lifestyle). This prompt will happen near the end of the program, right before the drafted character sheet is printed. These have less impact on the gameplay and can be skipped over, or randomized by choosing to add the information and then entering “random” for each selection. This information (if added) goes into newly created fields character.background, character.alignment, and character.lifestyle, which will be printed at the end of the program if they had been created in this step.

A Run of Fully Randomize
In the example of fully randomizing, the program will run itself with no handholding, making it the most straightforward of the options. If this option is chosen, the driver will ask for the name of the character and put that name into the created Player character.name. The program will then run randclass(), putting the returned class into character.class, and do the same with randrace() going into character.race. The program goes on to randomize all the ability scores and attach them to the related locations, filling in character.strength through character.charisma with the use of the function randstats(char). The user will get the chance to add extra information (see final bullet point above). Then the program will print a drafted character sheet with all the existing information about the newly created character using printallstats(char).

A Run of Randomize with Class-Stat Bias
If the user chooses this option, the program will run much like with Fully Randomize. Their paths diverge when randomly choosing stats, and instead of using the function randstats(char), the program will run the functions roll(dice, times) to create a rolllist, and then statassign(char, rolllist) to sort the rolllist and use its helper functions to assign the dice rolls to the most useful ability scores. The user will get the chance to input extra information (see final bullet point above). Following this, it prints all of the information about the new character in a drafted character sheet using printallstats(char).

A Run of Partially Randomize
If the user chooses this path, they will be asked every step of the way what they would like a specific trait to be for their character (ex. race, class, ability scores, etc.). If they input random for any of these, a corresponding function will be called to return a random choice from the available options for that trait (ex. random class would be found using randclass(), random race would be found using randrace()). If random was chosen, it will also print the random trait that was chosen (if the user selects random for race, it could print out dragonborn before continuing to run the rest of the creation). After choosing a name, class, and race, the user will be prompted to either randomize all stats or choose them. If they choose to randomize, the program will call randstats(char), which will randomize everything, otherwise it will call the function indivstat(char, stat) with each ability score. Once the user reaches this stage, they can either input a number between 6 and 18 for that score or they can choose to randomize that given ability score by inputting “random”. If they do this, the computer will call the helper function statinput(char, stat, roll(6, 3)), which inputs a random number for them in the acceptable range. Once all of the stats have been inputted, randomly or otherwise, the user will be allowed to add extra information if they so choose (see final bullet point above). The program then prints a drafted character sheet with all the available information using printallstats(char).
The Helper Functions
 
All randomization in the helper functions relies on the imported random library, most heavily on the function random.choice. Going in order, the helper functions work as follows:
•	advstats(char, rolllist, statlist, stat1, stat2) takes the two highest rolled ability scores (the first two indices of the sorted rolllist) and applies them to inputted stat1 and stat2 (the character’s class’s most important ability scores). It then randomly assigns the remaining scores to the other ability score slots using helper function whichstat(char, rolllist, statlist). This is called only in statassign(), and by extension only when the user randomizes with class/stat bias.
•	alignlist() holds all of the possible alignments for a character in a list and returns that list when called, used for random choice within the list or comparing to a user input to ensure validity.
•	backgroundlist() holds all of the possible backgrounds for a character in a list and returns them whenever it is called, used for random choice within the list or comparing to a user input to ensure validity.
•	classlist() holds all of the possible classes for a character in a list and returns them whenever it is called, used for random choice within the list or comparing to a user input to ensure validity.
•	fixword(word) looks in a user input for any unusual characters (commas, underline, quotations, etc.) and removes them, then changes any uppercase letters to lowercase for easier comparison with the lists of classes, races, and extra information, returns the input, used with every user input.
•	indivstat(char, stat) is used only when the user selects Partially Randomize, and it asks what value the user would like their character to have for a specific ability score. If the user inputs random, then indivstat() fills character.[givenstat] with a randomized value between 6 and 18 (the generally accepted stat values for abilities in Dungeons and Dragons before modifiers).
•	lifestylelist() holds all of the possible lifestyles for a character in a list and returns them whenever it is called, used for random choice within the list or comparing to a user input to ensure validity.
•	printallstats(char) goes through the data for the entire character and prints it in a meaningful sheet format, with indentation for greater clarity. Will print extra info if there is any available for the current character. This function is called at the end of the program every time, to display on the console the newly created character.
•	printbackgroundstats(char) is a helper function for printallstats(), used to print any background information that may have been found, as well as the in-game application of this information. This is useful mainly for debugging, but will be called whenever printallstats() finds extra information.
•	printmoney(char) is a helper function for printallstats(), used to print any lifestyle information that may have been found, as well as the in-game application of this information. This is useful mainly for debugging, but will be called whenever printallstats() finds extra information
•	printracialtraits(char) is a helper function for printallstats(), used to print the in-game benefits of being a character of a given race (extra strength for larger races, more intelligence for others, etc.). This will be called any time printallstats() is called
•	racelist() holds all of the possible races for a character in a list and returns that list when called, used for random choice within the list or comparing to a user input to ensure validity.
•	racespecs(race, method) is used when the user is inputting a selected race, if there is more specificity required from their given answer (ex. they input “gnome”; racespecs would prompt them to pick between a “deep” or “rock” gnome). This may also be called during randomization, if the randomizer originally picked a race with multiple specific options, in which case the program will choose between the available options for that race. The inputted “method” is regarding if the computer needs to randomize more fully or the user is choosing an extra descriptor for their class. This is called whenever a race is picked either by the user or the computer that needs more description.
•	randclass() chooses a class at random from classlist() and returns it, to later be added to character.class. This is called anytime the computer is randomizing a character’s class.
•	randrace() chooses a class at random from racelist() and returns it, to later be added to character.race. This is called anytime the computer is randomizing a character’s class.
•	roll(dice, times) is used to emulate rolling dice, where the input “dice” is used to determine the number of possible sides on the die being rolled, and the input “times” is used to determine the number of times that die will be rolled. It then returns the sum of all the rolls (ex. roll(6, 3) would mean rolling a six-sided die 3 times, and would return the sum of the three rolls). This is used whenever the computer randomizes a stat.
•	randstats(char) will go through each of the character’s ability scores and randomize them individually to some value between 6 and 18, relying on the use of the function roll(dice, times) for randomization. This is called any time the computer is randomizing all of the user’s ability scores.
•	statassign(char, rolllist) takes the highest two values from rolllist and assigns them to the two most useful ability scores for the inputted character, based on the character’s class, with the use of the helper function advstats(char, rolllist, statlist, stat1, stat2). This is called anytime the user wants to randomize their character’s ability scores with class/stat bias.
•	statinput(char, stat, statinput) takes a specified number from the user and applies it to character.[stat]. This is called when the user is specifying individual ability scores after having chosen Partially Randomize at the beginning of the program.
•	whichstat(char, rolllist, statlist) is a helper function used by advstats(char, rolllist, statlist, stat1, stat2) to randomly assign the remaining four ability scores. It will be called whenever two stats have been specifically assigned and the four remaining scores need to be distributed randomly.
